# Nga Rakau Taketake Forest Dynamics Model Description

*Note that this model description is heavily derived from the original ODD document written for [Morales and Perry (2017)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0304380016306068) and has only been updated to reflect the changes made to the model. As such it should not be used as is in any publication.*

## Overview

### Model description

The model description below follows the Overview, Design concepts, and Details (ODD) protocol described by Grimm et al. (2006, 2010); this approach is designed to support comprehensive and transparent model description and communication. To ensure that this model description is complete some information is repeated from the general description presented in the main document.

### Purpose

The main purpose of our model was to enable us to evaluate and/or assess the long-term viability of kauri or pohutakawa forest fragments (though the model is generalised for any NZ forest) under different management scenarios (including no management), disease spreads, and climatic conditions.

### Entities, state variables, and scales

The basic unit represented in the model was an individual tree, with individuals divided into three distinct life-stages: seedlings (individuals < approximately 50 cm in height), saplings (individuals > approximately 50 cm in height) and adults (Figure 1) ([Morales and Perry (2017)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0304380016306068) section 2.1; model description). Each individual adult tree was characterized by the following state variables: spatial location (on a discrete-space grid or lattice), species identity, diameter at breast height (dbh), height, age, growth form (either tree or tree fern), and disease infection status (for both phytothera and rust). Individual seedlings and saplings did not have an explicit spatial location; instead these life-stages were represented by their abundance in a grid cell.  Each species was characterized by the following parameters: shade tolerance, reproduction age, regeneration height, seed production, dispersal, gap maker, suppression tolerance, suppression mortality rate, palatability (herbivory), edge response, neighbourhood dispersal and in-fragment dispersal (each explained further below). Seedlings and saplings were characterized by their survival, and seedlings by the rate at which they transition to the sapling class.

The model was initialized and parameterized using the same data as used in [Morales and Perry (2017)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0304380016306068), that being data collected from unfragmented forest (continuous fenced forest) and from the published literature. The study area was located near Cambridge in the Waikato region, North Island, New Zealand. The unfragmented forests were located at Te Miro Scenic Reserve, Maungatautari Ecological Island North and Maungatautari Ecological Island South (Morales et al., 2016). The Maungatautari Ecological Island is surrounded by a predator-proof fence (Burns et al., 2012) and Te Miro is subject to active control of exotic mammalian pests (Morales et al., 2016).

The model was initialized with a fixed number of seedlings, saplings and trees specific for each species, with adult abundances differing for each site category (unfragmented forest, fenced, unfenced fragments). Each adult tree was allocated a diameter at breast height (dbh) from which its age and height were estimated based on standard allometric curves. The initial distribution of dbh values was simulated from a log-normal distribution conditioned on size-frequency information from each site. Thus, each time the model is run the initial size-frequency structure of the forest will differ, but the composition and structure of the forest will be similar.

One time-step or ‘tick’ (the model’s fundamental temporal unit) represents one year and, unless otherwise noted. The model is grid-based and only one adult tree can occupy any one grid cell, with the grid cells representing a 4 × 4 m cell by default, though this can be adjusted by the user. We choose this grid resolution because it is the approximate canopy size of an individual B. tawa tree and is close to the mean inter-tree distance recorded in the field. The model is spatially explicit and can simulate the dynamics of each individual adult tree in forest areas up to a size of ca. 16 ha; larger areas can be simulated but most of the forest fragments in the study area are very small (Waikato Regional Council, 2009).

### Process overview and scheduling
In each tick the model two types of steps are run, initially processes needing to be run for all agents, followed by processes run globally across the whole model, these processes are a series of ecological routines run sequentially for each type of step. The processes run for all agents are initial demography, growth, within patch seed dispersal, herbivory, disease, and background mortality. Global processes are gap formation via disturbance (such as fire), beyond patch seed dispersal, gap expansion and reduction, restoration, regeneration (recruitment), seedling/sapling demography and ENSO severity calculation.

Before running the model, the user can define different parameterisations and management scenarios. The model can be run with or without management, with or without disease, with different levels of disturbance or herbivory, with or without grass, and with or without impacts from weather altered by ENSO cycles. The user can also define the number of ticks (years) to run the model for.

At initialization the species abundances, and the dbh and age of each individual adult tree depend on the scenario being assessed (unfragmented forest, fenced and unfenced fragment). The model starts with a forest with the same number of seedlings (10 seedlings [individuals < approximately 50 cm in height] per species per grid cell) regardless of the scenario (up to 50 cm in height) and saplings (one sapling [individuals > approximately 50 cm in height) per species per grid cell). The number of seedlings was highly variable across the different sites from where we had collected parameterisation information. We choose to use the average of the total number of seedlings, which corresponded to approximately 8306 individuals per ha or 8.3 individuals per cell; we rounded this up to 10 individuals per grid cell. 

The transition from seedling to adult tree has two stages. The first stage corresponds to seedlings that form the seedling bank.  A species-specific proportion of seedlings transition to saplings each year.  Each year individuals in the sapling stage can transition (via a lottery process weighted by the light levels in each grid cell) to adult trees if there is not already an adult tree present in the grid cell. In both life-history stages, if the individuals survive but do not transition to the next stage they remain as part of the seedling or sapling bank until either they successfully move to the next stage or they die. A species-specific proportion of seedlings and saplings dies each year.  

Natural regeneration, as simulated, starts with dispersal processes occurring at three distinct scales: neighbourhood dispersal (‘under parent tree’ dispersal), in-fragment dispersal (movement of seeds away from parent individuals but within the fragment), and long-distance dispersal from beyond the simulated fragment.  In order to reduce the computational burden, and as is common in forest models, the fate of individual seeds is not modelled, and instead established seedlings are ‘dispersed’. Both local and long-distance dispersal processes depend on the ability of each species to disperse by vectors such as wind and birds. If restoration activities are simulated, the planting of saplings is represented by adding a user-determined number of saplings of each species to the sapling bank.

## References

- Burns, B., Innes, J., Day, T., 2012. The use and potential of pest-proof fencing for ecosystem restoration and fauna conservation in New Zealand, in: Somers, M.J., Hayward, M. (Eds.), Fencing for conservation. Springer New York, pp. 65–90.
- Grimm, V., Berger, U., DeAngelis, D.L., Polhill, J.G., Giske, J., Railsback, S.F., 2010. The ODD protocol: A review and first update. Ecol. Model. 221, 2760–2768.
- Morales, N.S., Perry, G.L.W., Burns, B.R., 2016. Fencing is not enough to reinstate regeneration: evidence from a large fruited canopy tree Beilschmiedia tawa. For. Ecol. Manag. 376, 36–44.
- Waikato Regional Council, 2009. Environmental information. Forest fragmentation. Key points. [WWW Document]. URL http://www.waikatoregion.govt.nz/Environment/Environmental-information/Environmental-indicators/Biodiversity/forest-fragmentation-report-card/ (accessed 8.18.16).